Okay, we're on again.
Where was that?
You do put out catalogues.
No, I don't.
I did for the first several years, but I don't put out any catalogues, no.
But how does it work?
I don't like soliciting.
I don't like asking people to buy things, and I very much dislike the letter that comes back saying no.
I find that humiliating.
I don't like doing the whole thing.
demeaning, exactly.
It sounds like you have a rather unusual procedure.
I think every bookseller is unusual and is himself.
And as long as enough things happen during the year, that's fine.
I'm not ambitious to get the greatest this or that or some wonderful conspicuous object at a sale.
And I'd rather do slightly different things.
Well, what happens?
You acquire things, and then you think it might be right for a certain collector?
No, I like to keep what I've just got for a while, and I'd much prefer it if somebody comes in and chooses something that's been here.
So really that's what happens.
People come and look.
Yes.
You don't alert them?
I do now.
I mean, I was even more remote, and for nine years of the 20, I think it was, got fed up with book fairs and didn't exhibit at all.
Now, I do go to, I do exhibit at the London Book Fair in the summer, and exhibit it in Los Angeles this winter, and may exhibit it in New York next.
We do that occasionally because I think it's necessary to appear occasionally.
And of course I like my bookselling colleagues very much and it's a very friendly club to be in.
So people will come in?
And on the whole not riffle through the shelves.
They don't like that happening unless I know somebody rather well.
People just, and I don't mark prices in my books.
I don't like surrounding myself with prices.
I can look up anything that anybody wants to know.
The system here is that if you're interested in something, we put it out on the table, and I tell you what it costs.
So after you look around, you go to it.
Or if you ask.
If you ask.
If you ask, that's right, yes.
We establish interest first.
Yes.
And the prices.
Otherwise, people just, I mean, I do the same.
In our shops, cool things, I just see the price, shove them back.
I want to see if I, especially if it's something that I have.
Exactly, yeah.
I want to see if I pay too much.
You did say something briefly about you had an attitude bordering on contempt for those who collect modern for us, particularly with the recession.
It's not to go on about that.
I wouldn't like to say I feel contempt for the people who do it.
They're welcome to their own idiosyncrasies in collecting.
As a collecting subject, I feel it's a very stupid one.
Why do you say that?
Because really very insignificant mass-produced objects of recent vintage
are hyped up to high prices through, I mean, probably through the need to discover a new collecting subject, and... Making it an industry, in other words.
You know, making it fashion.
But there has always been fashion in football.
Yes, but of all silly ones.
I can't think of any that's climbed lower than that.
When you...
You can climb down as far as you climb up.
I think when I realized that a James Bond book or Dorothy Sayers book or something, if it has its dust jacket on, it's valued highly.
Stephen King is really the one.
Stephen King, I don't even know.
He's the horror writer.
Horror writer, yes.
There's people who think of things.
Yes, yes, yes.
I think it's a dull-witted form of collecting, and a fashion of the moment, and the things are, so much is published, so much rubbish is published, so many people collect, that this satisfies the demand.
It does make the exercise accessible, however, to more people.
I think that's how it's happened.
Because so many of the other great things are going to happen.
And that really is so pricey that you can afford it for a focus.
Yes.
But you're not really collecting art.
You're doing something which people are doing.
It's like baseball cards.
And everybody's doing it, sort of.
You're trying to get a full run of baseball cards, you know, for the 1951.
You only have baseball cards, but that's an ephemeral thing.
Yes.
I suppose.
What is your focus, or is it mainly things that please you?
Mainly things that please me?
The focus changes.
I think the bookseller's luck and the pleasure is, or can be, that he can be a specialist, but he's not to be a specialist in that some new subject can excite.
And I'm actually much not very thrilled these days with, say, the great private presses and so on.
I've been through that.
I've travelled there.
I don't want to do it again.
It was an exciting thing that I know.
I mean, it's not particularly arrogant to say it.
I know it.
You didn't say I grew up or I passed through that phase.
You didn't say that.
I haven't actually passed through the phase.
If offered a collection, I'd really like to say yes, because I still enjoy the book, but it's not really my thing.
Well, what really excites you now?
Well, I mean, temporarily and for the moment, and I'm writing about it, is 18th century editions and editors of Shakespeare.
which has been a fun thing that somehow absorbed me, and which I think was not being looked at, and it was possible to collect them, and now I'm writing a book about them, and the editors, and the editing, and the illustrations, and so on.
But now you have acquired, you've put together a collection of these, right?
Yes.
What if one of your customers comes in
I wouldn't dream of splitting it up.
I might, of course, one day sell the whole thing as a collection, or might not, depends how life goes.
We have a private collection, which I like to defend and not sell, and don't keep in this room, therefore, of Japanese things, because we've been a certain amount to Japan.
Did you go to the Mary Heights sale?
No, I was interested to learn the results.
I certainly didn't want to go and buy that.
It was the same Japanese dealer who sold it all to her.
Yes, I bought things from him, yes.
He kept his hand back.
He bought a lot back, yes.
It was a delightful story.
Yes.
Princeton was quite nipped.
They thought that collection was going together.
Oh, yes.
But she did a good thing.
She was helping the Morgan Library.
I could never see the point of selling books in order to help a library.
Why didn't she just give the books to the Morgan Library?
Libraries spend so much on buildings and so little on books.
And I'm sure that with their endowments, that really shouldn't be a problem for them to get the money.
I did not think so, but apparently it was.
I think if they'd got the money and she'd given the books to the library, that would have been a much more sensible idea.
That collection, you know, it was in our country, I would say this country, this is Great Britain, but I mean, that was really quite an extraordinary collection in the United States.
Yes, very good, yes.
She is an extraordinary collection, isn't she?
Yes, she's an even older generation than I am, so I've not really known Mary Hyde, although... Alfred Freeman feels that she was the greatest moving collector, if I was asked.
I wouldn't use the word great of any collector because I don't think it's a great activity.
Okay.
The most accomplished, the most... I mean, I wouldn't use the word great.
But she's the most accomplished collector.
She may have the best... I don't know what he means.
Well, all right.
What little collector impresses you most?
No collector impresses me.
It just means flourishing money.
I think that...
She's got fairly obvious middle-of-the-road subjects, such as Johnson and Oswald.
But I feel you've done it rather well.
Well, how do you do it well?
It just means you buy a lot, and you're told by your dealers, or you see in catalogs what's going, and you acquire it.
I don't think it is a great activity.
It's nice to put... You have spent your life at this.
No.
You love it.
I enjoy buying things and having things.
I told you how you lingered longer at the bookstores when you were in publishing.
Yes, but I have no illusion that I was doing anything very noble.
But where would we be without collectors?
I mean, there would be no bailiff about Robert Cotton.
I think it's a lot of fun.
I think it's a lot of fun to acquire books, but I don't think it's particularly skilled.
Do you?
Well, I think it's skilled.
Well, I'll tell you, I was really impressed by some of the things of Leonard Baskin's house.
Leonard, I think, is... I would agree with you.
I think Leonard is quite... He has an eye for things that nobody even knows exist.
Exactly.
Leonard is very exceptional among collectors in that he has an artist's eye for things which other people are not particularly noticing.
He doesn't buy the fashionable thing.
He gets excited by a thing.
I use the word, but he never even knew it existed before.
Yes.
But he conceived.
I quite agree.
Leonard has been a great influence on me in my... I mean, I've learnt a taste for various things.
Leonard taught me the taste for various things which I've been enthusiastic about.
He's an original man.
And...
Whereas I would say Mary Hyde is probably not an original woman.
Oscar Wilde, Johnson, people have thought of them before.
Leonard in his knowledge of and his collecting of early colour printing, for instance, and some of the 17th century etchers and engravers was very original and I think he feels some contempt for those who collect middle of the road stuff.
Yes.
And you're working on his book, I believe, right?
No, I had a nice invitation out of the blue, we've known each other for many years, to write an essay for his catalog of his retrospective exhibition printing.
So I was pleased to accept his invitation, but said I must come and stay with him, work from his books in his house and talk with him.
And this happened in January.
We went over and stayed a fortnight there, and I enjoyed that very much and wrote his essay, and that's that.
So you did write the essay?
Yes, I wrote it very carefully, so.
So that will be coming out, I guess, next year?
End of next year, it will be the letterpress of his catalogue, you see, in that part of that bibliography.
How do you judge him as a contestant?
That's a very interesting...
It's a very interesting exercise that Lennon was involved in.
Yes.
Well, the Gehenna Press and all this, yes, yes.
Well, I've written about that now, and I'm happy to show you what I wrote, if you'd like to.
Really?
Yes.
Is this something that's published?
No, it will be published in that thing.
I mean, it shouldn't be used before then, I suppose.
It will be out when, next year or this year?
Next year is his exhibition.
Anyway, I think highly of it.
I'd kind of like to see it, but my publication deadline is a year from now.
Yes.
Well, I would say I'm happy for you to see it.
Ask Leonard if you want to quote from it or anything.
It would not appear until afterwards it was published, in any case, until your thing was published.
I mean, you know the Baskins.
My manuscript deadline is a year from now, which is practically speaking, I'm not coming out until 1992, I don't think.
Yes, yes, that's the way it publishes, yes.
So I would not beat you to the punch.
Yes, I'm not worried.
I'm sorry, I'm looking for the order.
I want to get as much as I can.
Yes, well, he was happy with it, sir.
I'm very lucky.
He has never talked to anybody about his book collectors before.
Has he not?
I'm the first one.
Yes.
You're the first writer he's talked about.
I'm the first writer.
Yes.
Well, I mean, I'm not that as a writer.
I was invited to the home as a writer.
Yes.
His book collecting has changed, of course, because he sold a tremendous lot of books.
Almost unique in every day.
He's a collector.
I mean, still a very obsessed and dedicated collector.
Yes.
Who will sell things that he loves.
the graces, the tears of his insides, the real arts with them.
And I said, Leonard, why?
And he goes, I said, what is that?
I kind of said, tape recorder can't pick that up.
He said, money, money, any of the money.
No, Leonard never has any money.
And he does.
He has a French expression, how you're on something, an agent of dealer collectibles.
It's not rare that people do sell things in order to acquire the thing.
That's not rare.
Or exchange things.
It is interesting that his wife is also a collector.
Yes.
Do you know the Gershbaugh's author?
I've talked to him.
He's got a magnificent collection.
He has a couple of examples in that show at the Morgan right now when he eliminated, the Dutch illuminated death.
I'm not going to take up too much more of your time, sir.
All right.
Well, it's been fun.
I would like to contact you again if that's okay.
Yes, of course.
I am planning a second visit in late summer, early fall.
Yes.
Do you think there's anything I missed?
Do you think we've hit the high points?
No, we talk and we'd probably repeat ourselves and talk about it.
But no, that's been interesting for me.
Thank you.
I wish you well.
Does it sound what I'm doing to be interesting?
Yes, it does.
I think it's a very wide canvas.
You are a man who's spent some time in publishing, so I'm interested in that.
Well, all right.
Well, if I were to sort of put on my publishing hat after listening to what you've been saying,
you're taking a very wide sweep as you first described it to me historically and so on and I think from a publishing point of view I tend to say that I tend to say that much the most interesting part of what you've undertaken is the modern one because you see after all people have written about written to extinction about the
we've agreed, or we've disagreed, that the word great collector is not a valid phrase, because collectors aren't great by being collectors, but the major collectors of years ago, people have written a lot about them.
Nicholas Barker's written about them, and so on and so on, and I'm not awfully interested to read any more about Thomas Phillips, and so on and so on.
He won't.
He'll be there, but... Yes, but I think if you're talking about the collector's mentality,
You have to read Dibdin, of course.
You will have read Dibdin.
I have acquired Dibdin in first edition.
But what you say about present-day collecting and its motives and how... You see, for a long time, I think, books and prices made some sense.
And books weren't up in the art world of nonsense.
And now I think they are spiralling up towards
rich nonsense, which has nothing to do with books anymore.
And that's it for you.
Do you really think there's stuff that fascinates people?
To read?
Yeah, because I think it's good gossip.
I think it's... And two of the chapters are gossip chapters.
Yes.
Well, that's all right.
The garden collection story is
Everybody's going to go to that.
The knowledgeable book crowd is going to go.
They're desperate to find out what I have.
A lot of people are.
I mean, I got my ticket to Bill Scheide's house, but he wanted to hear what I put together on Hayden and War.
I mean, I'll be honest with you.
And then he brought out the Gutenberg Bible.
And the Texas story, I think, will be of interest to some people.
And I've got a couple of other very interesting stories.
I'm not doing anything on Johnny Jenkins because it's been done to death.
You're very well done in the New Yorker.
Yeah, that was a great piece in the New Yorker.
There's a case now... But he's not.
I mean, he wasn't a great collector.
He wasn't a great dealer either.
No, I mean, he was a Texan.
He was a Texan with very little taste.
An interesting story, but it's been done.
So his name will mention, I'll mention him.
It'll probably show up in the index.
Yeah, I have to go over this with my editor.
Maybe they want two bargains, why not?
Yes, yes.
But maybe do the contemporary one first.
You see, I have to establish a base.
My title, I have a wonderful title.
You just told me I should, you just suggested that my, you like the gentlest of infirmities better than the gentle madness.
Yeah.
Okay, and then you said,
Well, taking up your phrase of the gentlest of infirmities is becoming more vicious, because in, was it Isaiah Thomas, is it?
In his day, it was open to quite a modest, was he a modest country printer?
He was to begin with, he made his money, no doubt.
He became the most prosperous printer.
He became the most prosperous printer, but he'd probably collect pretty well without being prosperous.
He was born, well, what he collected was ephemera.
Yes.
Junk.
what was considered junk, no way tickets, newspapers, brightsides, almanacs.
He is one of these collectors that if he didn't exist, these things wouldn't exist.
Yes.
I only mean now, without comparing with him, that it's a calculating major thing to buy a decent book.
Big bucks.
And you think a lot, unless you're very rich in money, it doesn't matter, which is the least desirable sort of collector.
You, with exceptions, I mean, I don't mean a rich person can't be a nice guy, can of course.
Nor do I mean that he must be a nice guy because he's rich, which is a common Southern American ethic, of course.
And therefore, a lot of the charmers left it.
Because when you go and... I used to go, I mean, for myself, I used to be able to go
In my first bookselling years, across to Paris, it was an easy thing to do from here, an hour to the airport and spend the day in Paris, come back in the evening or not, and go to a bookseller, I mean, one of several, and not to visit a number of booksellers, that wouldn't be the way of it there at all, but to go to a bookseller, look at several books he might show me in the morning,
I probably didn't dare ask the price, not because I was frightened to know the answer, but because there wasn't good manners.
I'm not talking about 1880, I'm talking about 1973.
And then we'd go out to lunch together, talk about things, and eat well and drink well.
And then he would judge quite shrewdly.
That was not a bad moment when we went back to his place again to explain about prices.
And I would realize this was a bit more than I should be spending, but fortified with pretty good mar de Bourgogne and so on, I would take two decisions that perhaps I shouldn't have taken, go back feeling very content with life, wake up at almost two in the morning realizing I'd ruin my family once more, and slowly digest it into the bloodstream.
That was very nice.
Well, now I can't behave like that because the decisions are too large.
I'm going to Paris in about ten days' time.
I shan't behave like that because something that was costing then several thousand pounds would now be up to like forty and fifty thousand pounds, which isn't the sort of sum I spend except once in the bluest moon, you see.
So a lot... It's not done frivolously over a nice bottle of wine.
It isn't a kind of minor, relatively minor decision that... All things are relative.
It isn't a relatively minor decision that I'm just willing to take and swallow and live with and enjoy and convince myself that it's marvellous and so on.
It would be a big thing.
And I don't like big things very much anymore.
Big decisions about things that involve money.
I'm not too keen on that.
So...
No, I'm not in favour of stress of that sort.
Well, I would like to get in touch with you again.
Yes.